                 2023

Emergency Management Plan




                 Prepared by: W. George Bench
                 May 18, 2023
                              Emergency Management Plan

Table of Contents

 Part 1: An Introduction to the Emergency Management Plan
 1.1 Introduction                                                    2
 1.2 Definitions                                                     3
 Part 2: Background
 2.1 Hazard Identification Risk Analysis                             6
 2.2 Emergency Declarations                                          6
 2.3 Operational Response Priorities                                 7
 2.4 Evacuations                                                     7
     ➢ Precautionary and Mandatory                                   7
     ➢ Shelter in Place                                              8
     ➢ Evacuation Instructions                                       8
 Part 3: Ontario Incident Management System
 3.1 Incident Management System (IMS)                                10
 3.2 Site Management                                                 10
     ➢ Single Command                                                11
     ➢ Characteristics of Unified Command                            11
     ➢ Incident Action Plan (IAP)                                    11
     ➢ Span of Control                                               11
     ➢ Simple IMS Organizational Chart                               12
 3.3 IMS Functional Roles at Site                                    12
 3.4 Emergency Operations Centre (EOC)                               15
 3.5 Functional Roles within an Emergency Operations Centre (EOC)    16
 3.6 Incident Management Forms                                       19
 Part 4: The Brock University Approach
 4.1 Incident Classification Levels                                  20
 4.2 Initial University Response and Considerations                  21
 4.3 Activation of an Emergency Operations Centre                    23
 4.4 Brock EOC Organizational Chart and Functional Roles             24
 4.5 Emergency Assistance to the Brock Community                     25
 4.6 External Resources                                              26
 4.7 Demobilization                                                  27
 4.8 Emergency Recovery                                              28
 4.9 Emergency Exercises                                             29
 4.10 Emergency Plan Annex List and Additional Resources             31




                                                                    1|Page
                                   Emergency Management Plan

Part 1:          An Introduction to the Emergency Management Plan
1.1       Introduction

Ontario communities are required by regulation to maintain emergency management programs based on
local hazards and risks, with oversight and support provided by Emergency Management Ontario (EMO).
In order to share a common operating structure with our local municipalities, emergency service providers
and to maintain effective business practices, Brock University has adopted emergency management
practices as outlined within the Ontario Incident Management System (IMS). This system serves as a
framework to guide our organizational response to significant events that impact the University and our
local communities (see Incident Management System (IMS) Guidance Version 2.0 – upon which a large
part of this plan was based).

The Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act R.S.O. 1990, defines an emergency as a situation or
an impending situation that constitutes a danger of major proportions that could result in serious harm
to persons or substantial damage to property and that is caused by the forces of nature, a disease or other
health risk, an accident or an act whether intentional or otherwise. Any situation that meets this definition
may call for the activation of this plan and those held by a local municipality and/or the Regional
Municipality of Niagara.

Effective emergency management programs strive to improve public safety and security by addressing
the five areas of emergency management - prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery:

      • Prevention: includes actions taken to stop an emergency or disaster from occurring. Such
           actions may include legislative controls, zoning restrictions, improved operating
           standards/procedures or critical infrastructure management.
      •    Mitigation: includes actions taken to reduce the adverse impacts of an emergency or disaster
           that cannot be reasonably prevented. Mitigation strategies can be undertaken by any individual
           or organization. Mitigation strategies are based on the results of a risk assessment and may
           include short-term and long-term plans and actions.
      •    Preparedness: ensures the ability to prevent, mitigate, respond to, and recover from an
           emergency.
      •    Response: refers to measures taken immediately before, during, or immediately after an
           emergency for the purpose of managing the consequences. This may require the
           implementation / activation of appropriate response plan(s) as well as the provision and pre-
           positioning of resources (such as personnel, services and/or equipment), the establishment and
           staffing of a response structure, the activation of information collection and sharing protocols,
           and the development of an incident-specific action plan to address the emergency.
      •    Recovery: refers to the process of restoring an affected community to a pre-disaster or higher
           level of functioning. This may include the provision of financial assistance, rehabilitation of
           critical infrastructure and habitats, return of evacuees, restoration of the environment or critical
           incident stress counseling. Recovery components also involve risk reduction components that
           encourage all levels, including communities and residents to build back better.

Based upon the IMS structure, this plan serves as an all-hazards response and management tool. It may
be used during simple (single agency) or complex (multi-agency) incidents that call for either single or
unified command. As a flexible structure, only the required functions of the IMS model should be
implemented as the incident response develops.

                                                                                                2|Page
                                  Emergency Management Plan

This document will include an introduction and basic orientation to the Incident Management System,
with information reproduced, summarized, or sourced to the latest guidance. That said, should the reader
require additional information or clarity in relation to aspects of IMS, they should review provincial
guidance directly.

1.2     Definitions

Access route: a route designated for the use of emergency vehicles approaching the emergency site.

CBRNE team: a team established under the authority of the Niagara Region with the support of the local
area municipalities. Partners include the Niagara Regional Police Service, local Fire Services, Niagara EMS,
Niagara Region Public Health, and the Niagara Health System. The team provides a response to
emergencies that are of a Chemical, Biological, Radioactive, Nuclear or Explosive (CBRNE) nature.

Command Post: the location from which the Incident Commander oversees incident management and
response at the site. There will be one command post per incident, and it is the headquarters for Incident
Command only. A vehicle, trailer, tent, or building may serve as the CP dependent upon the situation and
what is available (IMS definition).

Common Operating Picture: an understanding of a situation based on the most up-to-date information
and is shared among all responders and incident response organizations.

Community Emergency Management Coordinator (CEMC): the person designated to act as the
emergency manager for a municipality. Local Fire Chiefs generally serve as the CEMC in each of the
municipalities within the Region. Further, the Regional Municipality of Niagara also maintains staff in the
role of a CEMC to assist with the response to emergencies that affect regional infrastructure or are broad
in scope.

Debriefing: a formal opportunity to evaluate efficiency, learn from the experience gained and determine
how well the incident management process went. Leadership should facilitate the debriefing and the
results should be included in the After-Action Report (AAR). (Those incidents which are less serious may
not require a formal debrief, as a “hot-wash” (see definition below) may suffice.

Egress route: the route designated for exiting the emergency site.

Emergency Information Centre (EIC) and Joint-Emergency Information Centre (Joint-EIC): a designated
location that is properly equipped to coordinate public information management activities including the
sharing of information with the public and the media, receiving public inquiries and monitoring. A Joint-
EIC includes representatives from multiple communities and organizations to allow information and key
messaging to be coordinated more easily.

Emergency Management Ontario (EMO): a government organization responsible for monitoring,
coordinating, and assisting in the development and implementation of emergency management programs
throughout the province.

Emergency Operations Centre (EOC): a designated location where personnel representing communities and
organizations come together to support site response efforts. Activities in an EOC include managing and
providing information and resources, long-term planning, and other forms of coordination. In some non-site-
based incidents such as widespread flooding, an EOC may coordinate and command direct response efforts.
                                                                                            3|Page
                                   Emergency Management Plan

Brock University maintains primary and alternate EOC locations on the main campus and has the capacity to
meet virtually.

Emergency Response Route: roads or highways, designated to accommodate vital Emergency vehicles
and equipment without obstruction.

Emergency Services: all Police, Fire, Hydro, Gas, or related resources that may be utilized to effectively
respond to the emergency.

Emergency Site: the area where the actual scene of the emergency is located. An emergency may include
several sites, calling for a coordinated response.

Evacuation Centre: a premise established outside the emergency area which is capable of accommodating
persons displaced by the incident. For large scale situations, the activation of an evacuation centre should
be done in consultation with the Regional Municipality of Niagara Community Services Department.

Function: a set of related tasks and responsibilities. Incident management is divided into six main
functions: Coordination and Command, Operations, Planning, Logistics, Finance and Administration and
Public Information Management. In some incidents, additional functions may need to be carried out. This
can include Intelligence, Investigations, Scientific/Technical, Emergency Social Services and Continuity of
Operations. Other functions may need to be considered depending on the size and nature of an incident.

Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA): the HIRA completed by Brock University in relation
to potential hazards and their impact on the community should they be experienced.

Hot-Wash: an informal debriefing process that occurs immediately following an incident and allows
responders the opportunity to provide feedback. This process captures events while they remain fresh in
the minds of the responders to identify any issues or concerns and/or proposed improvements. Each
functional section should conduct a hot wash facilitated by their Section Lead.

Human-Caused Hazard: those hazards that involve an element of human intent.

Incident: a single distinct occurrence that calls for action to prevent or minimize loss. It may be described
as having potential to cause interruption, disruption, crisis, disaster, or catastrophe. Incidents may be
classified as simple or complex.

Incident Action Plan (IAP): a verbal or written plan that describes how an incident will be managed. It
includes incident objectives, strategies, and tactics. In a simple incident, objectives, strategies, and tactics
may be determined by the Incident Commander or EOC Director. In a complex incident, a network of
organizations may work together to determine objectives, strategies, and tactics. The written IAP is
coordinated by the Planning Section and explains how incident responders will work together and utilize
resources to achieve the response objectives.

Inner Perimeter: the area immediately surrounding the incident site that is designated as not accessible
to unauthorized persons for reasons of safety, preservation of evidence and/or security of the scene.

Natural Hazard: naturally occurring physical phenomena caused either by rapid or slow onset events
which can be geophysical, hydrological, climatological, meteorological, or biological in nature.

                                                                                                 4|Page
                                  Emergency Management Plan

Outer Perimeter: the larger area defined by the agency with jurisdiction, that encompasses the inner
perimeter. It protects the public from entering a danger zone, protects the command post (site) from
traffic and public interference and provides a level of defence in the event a subject were to breach the
inner perimeter.

Provincial Emergency Operations Centre (PEOC): an EOC managed by Emergency Management Ontario
(EMO), that actively monitors the level of emergencies and incidents throughout Ontario 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. The PEOC alerts ministries and senior levels of government and coordinates the provincial
response to incidents.

Scribe: a qualified person assigned to the Command Post and/or the EOC to maintain a record of activities
and decisions made.

Site: the location where an incident is or has happened (e.g., the scene of a high-rise fire or motor vehicle
accident). Some incidents, such as ice storms, do not have one single, defined site.

Site Response: the immediate response to an emergency situation, provided by responders at the scene
of the incident. Incident command will be established at the site to direct resources involved in priority
response. An Emergency Operations Centre may be implemented to provide strategic planning and
support to Site Command.

Staging Area: an area established away from the emergency site that is of sufficient size to accommodate
large numbers of personnel and vehicles, where responding personnel may report for briefing and
assignment of duties.

Technological Hazard: those hazards that stem from technological or industrial conditions. This includes
accidents, dangerous procedures, infrastructure deficiencies, and specific human activities that can cause
hazards.




                                                                                               5|Page
                                  Emergency Management Plan

Part 2:         Background
2.1     Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA)

In general, a hazard is defined as an event or physical condition that has the potential to cause fatalities,
injuries, property damage, infrastructure damage, agricultural loss, damage to the environment,
interruption of business, or other types of harm or loss. Hazards may be naturally occurring, technological
or involve an element of human intent.

Similar to the approach taken by the Regional Municipality of Niagara, Brock University has completed a
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (HIRA). This assessment examines the probability of occurrence
of credible worst-case scenarios and determines the potential adverse effects on our community. The
contents of the HIRA remain confidential and play a key role in emergency planning processes.

2.2   Emergency Declarations

A disaster can occur with little or no warning and cause emergency conditions in any area of the Regional
Municipality of Niagara. Emergencies vary in scope and intensity, from small, local incidents with minimal
damage to multi-jurisdictional disasters with extensive devastation and loss of life. They can escalate
rapidly with the potential to overwhelm the response capacity of an organization.

An emergency declaration promotes a sense of urgency in the community regarding the severity of an
emergency situation and the danger it presents. An emergency declaration should be made if the
community must take "extraordinary" measures to protect life, health, safety, and property. An
emergency must be declared in order to formally engage the powers described within the Emergency
Management and Civil Protection Act.

Specifically, section 4(1) of the Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act, states:

      • The head of council of a municipality may declare that an emergency exists in the municipality
        or in any part thereof and may take such action and make such orders as he or she considers
        necessary and are not contrary to law to implement the emergency plan of the municipality and
        to protect property and the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the emergency area.

As a private organization, Brock University has no authority to declare an emergency, however it may
implement its Emergency Management Plan (as appropriate) to coordinate a response to any incident
that impacts the Brock community, or to ensure there is a coordinated organizational response to
emergency declarations that have been introduced in accordance with the Act. An emergency declaration
may take three forms:

      a) A Municipal Emergency Declaration, where the Mayor or designate of a local area municipality
         has the authority under the Act to declare that an emergency situation exists within the
         boundaries of their municipality.

      b) A Regional Emergency Declaration, where the Regional Chair or designate has the authority to
         declare that an emergency situation exists within the boundaries of the Regional Municipality.
         Although the Regional Chair is empowered to declare a regional emergency at any location



                                                                                               6|Page
                                  Emergency Management Plan

         within regional boundaries, the Chair does not have the authority to declare an emergency on
         behalf of any area municipality, and

      c) A Provincial Emergency Declaration, where the Premier of the Province of Ontario or designate
         has the authority to declare that an emergency exists within Ontario. Further, the Premier also
         has the authority to declare an emergency on behalf of any community within the province and
         may also at any time declare that an emergency has been terminated on behalf of any Ontario
         municipality.

An emergency may be declared terminated at any time by:

      • The Head of Council (Municipal or Regional as the case may be), or
      • The majority of Council by vote, or
      • The Premier of Ontario, as the case may be.

2.3   Operational Response Priorities During an Emergency

Operational response priorities when conducting
emergency operations are:

      1. Safety and health of responders,
      2. Save lives,
      3. Reduce suffering,
      4. Protect public health,
      5. Protect critical infrastructure,
      6. Protect property and the environment, and
      7. Reduce economic and social losses.

2.4   Evacuations

In an emergency, it may be necessary to evacuate people
and animals from buildings or other areas due to:

      a) actual or potential threats to safety,
      b) the lack of sanitation facilities, or
      c) a lack of utilities.

There are two types of evacuations, Precautionary and
Mandatory:

      a) Precautionary Evacuation occurs when an
         evacuation is recommended within a certain
         perimeter, usually a building or a block until the initial situation in contained.

      b) Mandatory Evacuation takes place when it is determined that there is an absolute need to
         evacuate an area, usually on a large-scale, possibly for a long period of time (i.e., for more than
         24 hours).


                                                                                              7|Page
                                   Emergency Management Plan

Evacuation is one means of protecting the public from the effects of a hazard. The characteristics of the
hazard and its magnitude, intensity, speed of onset, and anticipated duration are all significant factors to
be considered. An evaluation of these factors will assist in determining the number of people to be
evacuated, the distance people must be moved to ensure their safety, the need for Reception/Evacuation
Centres, and the extent of traffic control and security required.

As a private organization, Brock University maintains the authority to close all or part of its facilities (which
are normally accessible to the public) and direct occupants to leave. Further, Brock University could be
impacted by an evacuation order, lawfully issued under the following circumstances:

      a) by the Regional Medical Officer of Health or Public Health Inspector, when a health hazard exists
         in any premises, in accordance with the Health Protection and Promotion Act. R.S.O. 1990,
         Section 13, Chapter H.7,
      b) by the Fire Department, when persons are in the immediate vicinity of a fire and when a local
         Municipal Fire Department By-Law is in effect, or
      c) in accordance with the Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act, during a declared
         emergency, the Lieutenant Governor in Council may make emergency orders, including those
         that apply to evacuations (Section 7.0.2(4)).

Police generally maintain the responsibility to co-ordinate the physical evacuation of buildings or areas.
The designation of evacuation or reception centres, which may be required for larger evacuations, should
be made in consultation with the Regional Municipality of Niagara Social Services Department.

In certain circumstances, it may be more appropriate to direct that occupants remain in place within a
building as opposed to risking evacuation through an area that may present a high risk to personal safety
due to the actions of an offender or the condition of the environment. This is commonly referred to as
"Shelter in Place." In relation to environmental hazards, when the Fire Department or Public Health
recommends this approach, those impacted would be advised to remain indoors, close all windows and
doors (sealing around them if possible) and turning off heating and ventilation systems. This would be
adapted as necessary should the situation impact a Brock University facility. This approach is not suitable
for prolonged emergencies.

Evacuation Instructions

In the event that an evacuation order is necessary, it is important that the message delivered does not
cause panic. The notification should provide as much information as possible, including (as applicable to
the situation):

                 a)   A short, concise description of the emergency using simple, everyday language
                 b)   Direct occupants to evacuate and the reason
                 c)   Identify the reception/evacuation centre and routes to that location
                 d)   Transportation options and pick-up points for those without transportation
                 e)   For residence students in particular, the need to lock their room and reminders to
                      take medication, food, suitable clothing, adequate blankets for duration of stay, if
                      known and if practicable.

During evacuation efforts, members of Brock Campus Security Services (CSS), Emergency Wardens or
other supervisory staff may come upon those who simply refuse to comply with the evacuation order. In

                                                                                                  8|Page
                                 Emergency Management Plan

such a situation, attempts should be made to persuade that person to comply with the direction. If they
continue to refuse, CSS, Emergency Wardens, or other supervisory staff (as the case may be) should
continue their effort to effect/confirm the evacuation in the rest of the facility. A record should be made
of the attempt to gain compliance, including the following detail:

            a)   Name of person refusing to leave
            b)   Name of any other occupants
            c)   Reason person is refusing to leave
            d)   Name of any witnesses present
            e)   Date and time of attempt
            f)   Location of person
            g)   Description or identifiers
            h)   Any other actions taken (including who this information was reported to Campus Security,
                 St. Catharines Fire Department, Police, etc.).

In contrast to evacuation efforts in the community at large, as Brock University is private property, CSS
Special Constables and/or police officers may consider authorities granted under the Trespass to Property
Act to compel an evacuation from any owned/operated by the university. This action would be a last resort
after all attempts to otherwise gain compliance have failed and evacuation is absolutely necessary. This
option may only reasonable once the initial evacuation effort has been completed, thereby avoiding
unreasonable delay which could otherwise impact the safety of others.

Upon being advised of the termination of the evacuation, the University shall (where necessary) develop
a resumption of activity plan and communicate key elements to the community. The resumption of
activity plan will focus on the operational readiness of university facilities to safely welcome occupants.




                                                                                             9|Page
                                    Emergency Management Plan

Part 3:           Ontario Incident Management System
3.1       Incident Management System (IMS)

The Incident Management System (IMS) is a standardized approach to emergency management
encompassing personnel, facilities, equipment, procedures, and communications operating within a
common organizational structure. IMS is predicated on the understanding that in every incident, there
are certain management functions that must be carried out regardless of the number of persons who are
available or involved in the emergency response. Beyond its use in the response to incidents, IMS may
also be used for managing planned events, such as a concert or parade.

A simple incident may involve few resources, be located within a small geographical area and last for only
a short period of time. For example, a structure fire, a water main break, a call for medical assistance, or
non-routine snow clearance.

A complex incident may involve the coordination of vast resources from many organizations and from
municipal, provincial, and federal governments. A complex incident may persist for weeks, months or even
longer periods. Organizations with vast resources may be able to handle some complex incidents without
assistance from outside agencies. The COVID-19 pandemic is a recent example of a complex incident.

Whether the incident is simple or complex, the principles of IMS can be applied as the process is highly
flexible, with a capacity to quickly expand or contract according to changing circumstances and
organizational needs. It is predicated on the understanding that in any incident there are certain
management functions – coordination and command, operations, planning, logistics,
finance/administration, and public information management - that must be carried out/considered,
regardless of the scale or complexity.

3.2       Site Management

In general, the first response to an incident at Brock University may include members of Campus Security
Services and/or subject matter experts from Facilities Management (electricians, gas fitters, etc.). In cases
where the incident is beyond their response capacity, assistance from emergency response agencies
would be sought. Effective and efficient site management enables all responders to work together to
achieve common goals/objectives.

Should an incident at Brock University require support from an external emergency response agency
(Police, Fire, EMS, etc.), command and control of the response would be assumed by the appropriate
agency. The organization leading the effort would establish Incident Command at the site and assume
responsibility for managing the response to the incident. The responsibility for Incident Command may
change from one organization or jurisdiction to another, based on required expertise or the scale of the
incident.

The primary responsibilities of the Incident Commander at the site include:

      •   Defining the objectives, strategies, and tactics for the overall incident response,
      •   Coordinating the activities of the incident response organizations,
      •   Maintaining the safety of all incident responders, and


                                                                                                10 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

     •   Coordinating all aspects of the site including facilities, communications, logistics and other aspects
         as appropriate.

The Incident Commander coordinates and commands all the incident site response activities. It is
important to note that no organization has tactical command authority over any resources or personnel
from another organization unless such authority has been transferred. Coordination and command of an
incident at the site takes place from an Incident Command Post.

Single Command

This is the most common model of command. It exists when incident decision-making in relation to
directing, ordering, or controlling the response to an incident is straightforward and independent. A Single
Command model is usually followed when:

a)       only one organization or jurisdiction is involved,
b)       multiple jurisdictions or organizations involved in decision-making agree to follow this model, and
c)       if the responsibility is legally that of one jurisdiction or organization.

Characteristics of a Unified Command

Unified Command enables decisions to be made jointly by two or more jurisdictions that have legal
responsibilities regarding an incident. The members of the Unified Command team are the designated
representatives of the jurisdictions involved in the unified decision-making.

The concept of "Unity of Command" means that each person, at every level, reports to only one clearly
designated supervisor, who may or may not come from the same organization or jurisdiction. This
provides orderly lines of command and accountability from individual responders up through supervisory
personnel to the Incident Commander.

Incident Action Plan (IAP)

Every incident must have an Immediate Action Plan (IAP) that may be spoken or written. It provides all
incident supervisory personnel with objectives and the strategies, tactics, and directions for achieving
them. An IAP will address response priorities as outlined on page 7.

The Operational Period is the period of time assigned to achieve the objectives of an Incident Action Plan.
It can be of varied length, though usually would not be longer than 24 hours. An Operational Period may
be modified or revised if the IAP is altered as circumstances change.

Span of Control

Experience shows that one person can effectively supervise between 3 and 7 elements, with 5 being the
optimal number. One element could be a single individual (such as technical specialist) or a complex
resource (such as a team with a shared intent and skill set). When an incident expands or contracts, span
of control must be maintained by either combining resources within larger components (such as a Strike
Teams or Groups with adequate supervision) or by eliminating components.



                                                                                                 11 | P a g e
                                     Emergency Management Plan

Simple IMS Organization Chart (Site Command)

A simple incident may require little in
the way of resources to implement an
effective response, while a more
complex incident may call for support
from several agencies. Regardless of
scale, IMS recognizes that responses,
both simple and complex, share
common function requirements.

3.3       IMS Functional Roles at Site

Primary functions called for during a response to an incident at site include:

      •     Coordination and command (formerly referred to as command staff)
                o Incident Commander (supported by a scribe),
                o Liaison Officer,
                o Safety Officer, and
                o Emergency Information Officer
      •     Operations
      •     Planning
      •     Logistics, and
      •     Finance and Administration.

It is important to remain mindful that these functions are common across incident types and that in simple
incidents, few people may be responsible for all necessary functions without being overwhelmed. As the
response to an incident expands in scale or complexity, additional resources may be assigned to perform
these functional requirements.

The Incident Commander (sometimes referred to as Manager) leads the response activities at the incident
site. Primary responsibilities of the Incident Commander (at the site) have been highlighted earlier.

In a large or complex incident, an Incident Commander may appoint a Deputy Incident Commander to
assist with incident coordination and command. The Deputy Incident Commander may also take site
command while the Incident Commander in unavailable.

Scribes provide critical support and take notes during meetings and teleconferences, document key
activities, events, agreements, decisions, and any matters of potential legal significance throughout an
incident. Although a Scribe may be assigned to take notes, documentation is the responsibility of all
responders.

Liaison Officer

      •     The primary contact for incident response organizations; reporting directly to the Incident
            Commander,



                                                                                                12 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

    •   Incident response organizations may include all levels of government, first responder services,
        nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and private sector organizations, and
    •   Incident response organizations may provide knowledge, skills and/or other supports arranged
        through the Liaison Officer.

Safety Officer

    •   Monitors safety conditions and develops safety measures for an incident,
    •   Assesses and communicates information on hazards that are present within an incident,
    •   Advises the Incident Commander (or Unified Command) on matters relating to the health and
        safety of incident responders,
    •   Ensures that the required personal protective equipment (PPE) is worn,
    •   Contributes to the safety portion of the IAP and/or Incident Medical Plan as needed,
    •   Coordinates safety efforts if more than one response organization is involved in the incident, and
    •   Has the authority to change, suspend or stop any activities that are deemed hazardous to
        protect the health and safety of incident responders.

*It is important to note that final responsibility for health and safety matters in an incident rest with the
Incident Commander.

The Emergency Information Officer (EIO) communicates with the public and liaises with the media to
provide information relating to an incident. In a large incident, the EIO may lead a team of communications
personnel. In larger or more complex incidents, organizations may prefer to establish a Public Information
Management Section with the EIO assigned as the lead.

The Operations Section carries out the tactical activities necessary to implement the Immediate Action
Plan (IAP) and coordinates all incident response actions at site. This includes managing the day-to-day
response and establishing short-term planning. The Section should be organized to meet the needs of an
incident and make efficient use of resources assigned to an incident. Like all IMS Sections, the Operations
Section may be scaled to the situation. The Section may include personnel from incident response
organizations that have a major role in the response.

The primary responsibilities of the Operations Section include:

    •   Coordinating incident response activities,
    •   Communicating with the Incident Commander and other functional sections to keep responders
        informed of the current situation,
    •   Supporting the development of the IAP, including the development of strategies and tactics to
        achieve incident objectives,
    •   Implementing the IAP and making tactical adjustments as necessary, as the situation changes,
    •   Managing the operation of all resources assigned to an incident,
    •   Planning immediate response tasks in detail, and
    •   Coordinating volunteer activities.

It is important to note that in a complex incident, the Operations Section may expand to include multiple
branches such as volunteer management, victim services or other emergency services.



                                                                                               13 | P a g e
                                 Emergency Management Plan

The Planning Section is responsible for maintaining situational awareness, developing the IAP and long-
term planning. The Planning Section may be scaled as necessary, depending on the nature of the event
and the capacity of the organization. Incident action planning is the first priority for this Section and
includes:

    •   Working with the Incident Commander and the other functional sections to prepare the IAP that
        captures incident objectives, strategies, and tactics for the next operational period, and
    •   Producing and sharing a written version of the IAP.

The Planning Section should develop long-term plans that consider all possible situations and resource
needs beyond the current operational period as well as contingency plans that incorporate possible risks
and outcomes based on the best and worst-case scenarios. The Planning Section should also develop
demobilization plans.

The Planning Section at the site is responsible for the information management and promotes
situational awareness and record keeping by:

    •   Collecting, confirming, analyzing, and sharing information about an incident,
    •   Developing situation reports and ensuring that up-to-date situation information is available to
        incident responders, and
    •   Managing documentation and records relating to an incident.


The Logistics Section performs several important functions at the site such as providing and tracking
resources to support an incident response. The resources arranged support both the incident and the
responders. The primary responsibilities of the Logistics Section include:

    •   Ordering, receiving, storing, and housing resources,
    •   Setting up, maintaining and demobilizing facilities such as the Incident Command Post,
    •   Arranging transportation,
    •   Setting up, maintaining, and tracking telecommunications and IT equipment,
    •   Providing medical services for incident responders, and
    •   Arranging food services.

The Logistics Section has an important role to play at the site where resources are higher in demand.
During an evacuation coordinated by a municipality, the Logistics Section at the site may arrange food,
shelter, and other personal items for evacuees.

The Finance and Administration Section is responsible for the financial and administrative aspects of an
incident including tracking personnel time sheets. Typically, most of the work under the Finance and
Administration Section is not carried out at the site.

Please refer directly to Emergency Management Ontario: Position Checklists for a more detailed
explanation of expectations had for each role associated with the Incident Management System model.




                                                                                            14 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

More Complex Incidents

As incidents evolve, so must the response model. In simple incidents, the Incident Commander may be
responsible for all the components associated with the IMS model. In more complex incidents,
responsibilities will be assigned (Operations, Planning, Logistics and Finance/Administration) to support
the response. Functions not specifically assigned, remain the responsibility of the Incident Commander.
In addition, site operations may require support from an Emergency Operations Centre.

3.3       Emergency Operations Centre

As described in the latest IMS guidance document, an Emergency Operations Centre (EOC) is a place
where those responsible for the response come together to:

      •   Support incident response activities and responders at the site as well as other EOCs (when
          applicable),
      •   Coordinate incident resources as well as inter-organizational activities and internal operations
          relating to an incident,
      •   Coordinate plans and planning for short and long-term needs,
      •   Coordinate and command incident response directly from an EOC (usually in non-site-based
          incidents),
      •   Coordinate collaboration between incident response organizations and additional EOCs, and
      •   Share the responsibility with incident responders at the site and manage certain operations such
          as emergency shelters.

An EOC may operate with an organizational chart that is very similar to that of site command (see page
12) as it shares similar functional requirements of coordination and command, operations, planning,
logistics, finance/administration, and public information management. Just as IMS is scalable at the site,
it too remains scalable in an EOC. Depending upon the nature of the incident, few or all EOC functions
could be stood up to support the response effort.

The role of an EOC may vary
depending upon the nature of the
incident and the response
organization. In general, EOCs
function to provide support to
site operations. To illustrate this
distinction, site command would
be responsible for the tactical
response to the incident (in the
controlled area of the scene)
whereas the EOC would provide
support for this response and
focus on strategic issues and/or those outside of the scene itself. This is the most common structure of an
EOC at Brock University, as responding agencies will be responsible for site command and resolution of
the incident. That said, there are rare situations where an EOC at Brock University may have command
authority, as was the case during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Organizations may modify titles and sections to meet their specific needs – as has Brock University.

                                                                                             15 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

3.4       Functional Roles in an Emergency Operations Centre

The role of an Emergency Operations Centre may vary due to the nature of the response and the capacity
of the organization(s). EOCs often provide support to the site(s). However, in some responses, they may
play a coordination or, more rarely, a command role.

Similar to the Site Incident Command model, EOCs have standard functional responsibilities of roles and
responsibilities (or functions). The EOC Director ultimately decides which of the roles/functions are to be
staffed in order to manage the incident effectively.

The EOC Director has a primary responsibility to coordinate support (resources and information) for
incident response. In rare circumstances, the EOC Director may be in command of an incident response
and take on the title of EOC Commander. At Brock University, this may be the case in situations where the
response effort is not otherwise subject to Site Command provided by an external agency (such as the
COVID-19 pandemic response).

The primary responsibilities of the person assigned as Scribe relate to incident record-keeping. Scribes
take and collect notes throughout the duration of an incident. They should also take notes during meetings
and teleconference calls as well as record key activities, events, agreements, decisions, and any matters
of potential legal significance.

In the absence of an EOC Director, the Deputy EOC Director may be given the authority to manage a
function or coordinate tasks. In some cases, the Deputy EOC Director may step in when an EOC Director
is handling other duties or is otherwise unavailable.

The primary responsibility of the Executive Director is to support the work of an EOC Director. The
Executive Assistant often coordinates the “briefing up” of incident information to senior and elected
officials, which includes managing correspondence, preparing briefing decks and other documents as
needed.

A Legal Advisor may be needed to provide advice and to identify and manage legal matters relating to an
incident.

The Liaison, Safety and Emergency Information Officers share similar responsibilities to those described
earlier in relation to Site Command.

Unless an EOC has a command responsibility, an EOC Operations Section does not carry out tactical
activities needed to directly respond to an incident. This would be the responsibility of the site operations
team.

The EOC Operations Section may instead focus on supporting the response or directly coordinating
aspects of an incident. IMS offers three EOC options to reflect the needs of different organizations and
varying incident demands:

      •   EOC Option 1 uses an EOC Operations Section that helps support site operations and remains
          responsible for communication and coordination with the site. (This is the option commonly in
          place at Brock, however this remains situationally dependent.)


                                                                                               16 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

    •   EOC Option 2 combines the responsibilities of the Operations Section with the Situation Unit
        (which would normally fall under Planning) to become an EOC Situational Awareness Section.
    •   EOC Option 3 introduces an EOC Operational Awareness Section as opposed to an Operations
        Section. This Section assumes responsibility of functions normally assigned to those carried out
        by the Operations Section and the Situation Unit (normally falls under planning).

Regardless of the EOC options, an Operations Section should coordinate with other EOCs and incident
response organizations throughout the planning cycle. This may include meetings, teleconference calls
and other regularly scheduled check-ins. This section may work with the Logistics Section to gather
resources for the site or with the Planning Section to develop short-term plans.

The primary responsibilities of the EOC Operations Section include:

    •   Coordinating day-to-day support and EOC coordination activities on behalf of the EOC Director,
    •   Communicating with the EOC Director and other functional sections to keep them informed of
        the current situation,
    •   Supporting the development of the Incident Action Plan, including the development of objectives,
        strategies, and tactics,
    •   Implementing the IAP and adjusting, if necessary, as the incident develops (subject to EOC
        Director approval as required), and
    •   Managing the operation of all resources assigned to an incident.

If an incident involves a large number of casualties, a victim services or emergency social services branch
may also be required within an EOC Operations Section.

The EOC Planning Section is responsible for managing the Incident Action Plan process, long-term
planning, and contingency planning. Depending on the EOC option, they may also be responsible for
situational awareness. The Planning Section function may be stood up and staffed depending on the
capacity of the response organization and the nature of the incident.

It is important to note that unlike the Site Command model, the Situation Unit may or may not sit within
the EOC Planning Section. In EOC Option 2 (above), the Operations Section would become a Situational
Awareness Section, supervising the Situation Unit, which remains responsible for gathering, sharing, and
maintaining situational awareness. In EOC Option 3 (above), the Operational Awareness Section absorbs
the role of the Situation Unit. Regardless of the EOC option, situational awareness must be clearly assigned
and is key to effective and efficient incident management.

Incident Action Planning is the first priority for an EOC Planning Section. This process includes:

    •   Working with other functional sections and the EOC Director to prepare the IAP that captures
        incident objectives, strategies, and tactics for the next operational period, and
    •   Producing and sharing a written version of the Incident Action Plan.

Long-term planning is an ongoing process that includes:

    •   Consulting with the other functional sections and the EOC Director as well as making use of
        existing plans such as an emergency response plan,


                                                                                               17 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

    •   Considering scenarios for possible situations and resource needs beyond the current operational
        period based on current situational awareness and risk assessments,
    •   Developing plans for incident response activities beyond the current IAP, and
    •   When needed, beginning to plan for the shift from response to recovery, including demobilization.

Contingency Planning is an important aspect of preparedness both before and during an incident. This
process includes developing plans that incorporate possible risks and outcomes based on the best and
worst-case scenarios for possible events that may happen in the future in order to be better prepared.
The EOC Planning Section may have an information management function (Situation Unit) similar to that
described earlier in reference to Site Command (page 14).

The EOC Logistics Section locates, provides, and tracks resources to support an incident response. These
resources support both the incident and the responders. The EOC Logistics Section is responsible for
meeting the needs of an EOC and/or additional incident management locations as well as its personnel.
This includes ensuring that there is equipment, supplies and food as needed for an EOC and/or additional
incident management locations.

Resources at the site or in an EOC may include:

    •   Personnel,
    •   Equipment,
    •   Supplies,
    •   Services,
    •   Telecommunications and IT Support,
    •   Transportation, and
    •   Medical Services for incident response personnel.

The primary responsibilities of the EOC Logistics Section are similar to those described earlier, in relation
to Site Command. In addition, the EOC Logistics Section often works closely with the EOC Finance and
Administration Section to coordinate efforts around procurement, tracking and paying for resources and
keeping records.

The primary responsibilities of the EOC Finance and Administration Section include:

    •   Managing financial matters, including leases and vendor contracts,
    •   Tracking and reporting on costs incurred,
    •   Recommending cost-saving measures,
    •   Managing administrative databases,
    •   Tracking timesheets for incident response personnel and other resources,
    •   Tracking, analyzing, and reporting on compensation resulting from property damage or injuries,
    •   Tracking mutual assistance arrangements and monitoring their costs,
    •   Tracking disaster recovery assistance arrangements and monitoring their costs, and
    •   Tracking fundraising when needed.




                                                                                               18 | P a g e
                                 Emergency Management Plan

EOC Public Information Management Section (where activated)

Depending on the nature of the incident, an EOC may operate with an Emergency Information Officer
(EIO), or a section may be stood up and staffed to address needs. The EIO may lead this new section or the
EIO may remain a part of command staff and the new section would have a lead appointed.

The primary responsibilities of a Public Information Management Unit include:

    •   Preparing and sharing information with the public through public information releases,
        warnings, and alerts,
    •   Monitoring the media and public reaction,
    •   Acting as the media liaison for all media related activities such as press briefings,
    •   Developing media messages for the IAP and all public facing messages, and
    •   Advising the EOC Director/EOC Commander and Public Information Management Section
        personnel on communications issues.

Incident Management System Forms

The Ontario Incident Management System (IMS) uses
specific forms to assist with incident management
processes and procedures, as well as to represent a
record of decisions and actions. In keeping with the IMS
‘toolbox concept’, organizations may use only the forms
needed for a specific incident response. These forms are
designed for all-hazard use and are applicable to both
site-level and EOC-level responses. Detailed instructions
and a brief overview of the form’s purpose, preparation
and distribution accompany each form.

The IMS Forms Package is available on the Brock
Emergency Management SharePoint Portal. Also
available on the SharePoint site are Microsoft Word-
fillable forms amended for use within a Brock University
EOC.




                                                                                            19 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

Part 4:         The Brock University Approach
4.1     Incident Classification Levels

Members of Campus Security Services (CSS) and Facilities Management (FM) are routinely involved in the
initial response to incidents on campus, with the scope of their involvement being dependent upon the
nature and scale of the event. In many circumstances, the incident may be resolved in short order, without
support from outside agencies. In others, the incident may require support from one or more outside
agencies and vary in complexity and duration.

An IMS Guidance document prepared by Emergency Management Ontario, provides response escalation
guidelines, which can assist organizations in classifying incidents, supporting an effective and efficient
response. In this model, there are four response levels which detail escalating incident complexity: small
(single organization response), large, major, and lastly, a local, provincial and/or national level emergency.

An assessment as to where an incident may fall on this scale may assist in reaching a determination if the
Brock University Emergency Operations Centre (EOC) should be established and further, whether a full or
partial activation (only some functions required) is appropriate.

Level 1 (Single organization): Site Command only

In general, an incident that may be resolved by one or more Brock departments with or without support
from another organization (police, fire, EMS, Enbridge, etc.) will generally not be viewed as a complex
incident. These incidents are more routine in nature and span a relatively short time frame. Examples of
a level one incident may include a minor vehicle collision, personal injuries/medical issues, natural gas
leak, a fire alarm/minor fire or disturbance. A Level 1 incident is managed at the site of the incident and
will likely not require support from the Brock Emergency Operations Centre.

Level 2 (Large incident – multiple organizations): Site Command with optional EOC support

An incident that requires support from multiple emergency service organizations will be classified as a
Level 2 incident. In these incidents, site command will be assumed by the lead emergency response
agency, with Brock staff providing support as necessary and appropriate. Depending upon the nature of
the event, a Level 2 incident may lead to partial or full activation of the Brock University EOC. These
incidents are naturally more complex and may extend for a greater period.

It is important to note that a routine incident that calls for a multi-agency response, not considered
complex, may not lead to a partial or full activation of the Brock University EOC.

Level 3 (Major or complex incident): Site Command with EOC support

Major incidents by their nature are complex and may be large in scale and/or duration. Incidents of this
type will require effective command at the site with support from a fully activated EOC. Should Brock
University be impacted directly by a Level 3 incident, it is important to recognize that site command will
be assumed by the appropriate emergency response agency or agencies. Brock University staff may be
required to support the effort of emergency responders at or near the incident site.




                                                                                               20 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

An event of this nature may lead to an activation of more than one EOC (organizational, municipal and/or
regional). In such circumstances, it is important to ensure that response efforts are coordinated, and
communication chains remain effective between EOCs.

Level 4 (Local, provincial and/or national level emergency): In this level, a complex incident may impact
one or more sites over a large geographic area or be non-site specific with multiple EOCs requiring multi-
agency coordination.

This response level includes complex incidents that may have an impact at a local, provincial and/or
national level with potential for very serious or potentially catastrophic consequences to life safety, critical
infrastructure, property and/or the environment. The response and recovery phases to a Level 4 incident
may last for an extended time. The COVID-19 pandemic is an example of an incident that met this
threshold.

At Brock University, for incidents of this nature, the EOC will take immediate responsive action and
develop plans to address the evolving situation as necessary. Where appropriate, recommendations may
be made to senior administration who will continue to provide strategic leadership in relation to the
ongoing operation of the University and retain decision making authority. That said, while activated, the
EOC remains empowered to make decisions and take immediate action for any emergent or exigent
situation.

4.2       Initial University Response and Considerations

The nature of incidents that may occur at Brock University, or in the nearby community with a direct
impact on campus activities, may vary significantly. Incidents may be naturally occurring, technological or
the result of human action – accidental or with criminal intent. Staff members who respond to any incident
on campus will do so in accordance with standard operating procedures.

While responding to any incident, all staff must assess the scene for potential hazards prior to entering
and only take action that is appropriate given their level of training and availability of personal protective
equipment (as required). It is important that others involved in the response, including those from an
outside agency, be informed as to the nature of the identified hazard as soon as possible.

Members of Campus Security Services (CSS) are likely to play a significant role in the response to any
incident on campus. Depending on the nature of the incident and the risk, information may be relayed
directly to the appropriate emergency service via 9-1-1. Members assigned to the Central
Communications and Monitoring Centre (CCMC) may be required to relay this information where 9-1-1
calls were not placed directly by those at the site.

The CCMC is operated by CSS and remains available to provide support 24 hours a day, 7 days week. In an
emergency, the CCMC can be reached at 905-688-5550 extension 3200.

Staff responding to any incident must remain aware that several hazards could be present. Some incidents
could include chemical, biological, radioactive, nuclear, or explosive hazards. More common examples of
hazards include:

      •   fallen wires,
      •   gas leaks,

                                                                                                 21 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

    •    weather/road conditions (ice/high winds),
    •    tanks containing flammable or explosive material,
    •    unstable ground/buildings, or
    •    smoke and dust particulates.

The first Campus Security Officer (or *certified/qualified staff member as the case may be) on the scene
of an emergency shall:

        a) advise the CCMC (Dispatch) of the following:
              i. the exact location of the emergency,
             ii. a brief description of the type of incident,
            iii. an estimate of the number of casualties/injuries and/or the extent of damage,
            iv. other services required to assist, and
             v. access routes and precautionary measures for others who may be responding.
        b) take the necessary immediate action(s) to safeguard life and property,
        c) assume control until the first supervisor arrives, and
        d) maintain radio communications (CSS specific).

        * In this case, certified/qualified staff is defined as employees who have had specific training and
        certification directly related to the nature of the emergency. An example of a certified/qualified
        staff member may be an electrician, should the issue relate to an electrical hazard.

The first Campus Security Supervisor (or certified/qualified supervisor as the case may be) on the scene
shall:

        a) assume command of the site until relieved by a more senior member of CSS, a certified/qualified
           supervisor of another Brock department if appropriate (provided that department will remain
           responsible for the response effort – example, FM qualified staff who may oversee an
           emergency repair to a utility), or a member of the emergency response agency having
           jurisdiction,
        b) evaluate the scale and scope of the emergency scene,
        c) assist with the safeguarding of life and property,
        d) establish the inner and outer perimeters as necessary,
        e) provide further details of the incident to the CCMC and other supervisors as appropriate,
        f) at the earliest opportunity, ensure the Director of CSS (or their delegate) has been notified of
           the incident,
        g) request the attendance of additional emergency and support services, as required,
        h) at the earliest opportunity, ensure that Marketing and Communications have been advised of
           the incident, and
        i) as appropriate, obtain support of the CCMC to issue a bulletin via the mass notification
           application.

The Campus Security Supervisor (or person acting in that capacity) remains specifically responsible for the
following actions, as necessary:

        j) establish or recommend an area for a temporary field command post for emergency services if
           required,
        k) designate emergency response routes to and from the scene,

                                                                                              22 | P a g e
                                     Emergency Management Plan

          l) designate the location of a staging area if required,
          m) co-ordinate the evacuation of persons in the immediate area of the incident, as required,
          n) brief the appropriate supervisor of the emergency services agency leading the response effort
             on all relevant information,
          o) provide support to emergency services as required, and
          p) as necessary, support the exchange of information between the Incident Commander (police,
             fire, or EMS) at the emergency site and the Brock University EOC should it be activated.

The Director of Campus Security or delegate will:

          a) be briefed by the first supervisor, as to the status of the situation,
          b) take steps to ensure that the responsibilities assigned to the first supervisor on scene have been
             addressed,
          c) redeploy resources as necessary to meet the requirement of the situation,
          d) in all response options, prioritize the safety of members,
          e) ensure that Marketing and Communications is advised and responds to the situation,
          f) as required, request that an Emergency Operations Centre be implemented in accordance with
             the process outlined in Annex 1, “Activation of the Emergency Operations Centre,” and
          g) as appropriate, ensure that an investigation (scaled to the nature of the incident) is commenced.

4.3        Activation of the Emergency Operations Centre

Any supervisor may escalate a request to implement an Emergency Operations Centre through their chain
of command to the Vice-President Administration, or delegate.

Once approved, the Director of Emergency Management (or delegate) will be notified. They in turn will
activate this plan and implement an Emergency Operations Centre, in accordance with the process as
outlined within Annex 1, “Activation of the Emergency Operations Centre.”

In situations where the escalation of such a request may result in an undue delay, the Director of
Emergency Management (or delegate) may authorize the activation of an Emergency Operations Centre.

All requests to activate an Emergency Operations Centre proactively, to plan for an anticipated event, are
to be approved by the Vice-President Administration, or delegate.

An Emergency Operations Centre may be established in the following locations on campus:

      •    The Primary EOC will be established in the Kenmore Centre Classroom (KC-120), in close proximity
           to the CSS office.
      •    An Alternate EOC may be established in the Sankey Chamber, located on the 300 level of
           Mackenzie Chown A-Block.

Dependent upon the situation, should the locations listed above not be suitable due to scale or proximity
to the incident, an Emergency Operations Centre may be established on or off campus in any facility
deemed suitable by the EOC Director. In addition, should circumstances require, a virtual Emergency
Operations Centre may be established using a platform such as but not limited to, Microsoft Teams.



                                                                                                 23 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

Upon activation of the Emergency Management Plan, members required to staff an Emergency
Operations Centre will be notified of the nature of the incident and location of the Emergency Operations
Centre in accordance with the process described in Annex 1 “Activation of the Emergency Operations
Centre.”

It is important to note that the staffing level of an Emergency Operations Centre will vary dependent upon
the nature and scale of the incident. For example, a relatively simple incident may only require that
command staff and key section leads be engaged. In contrast, a complex incident may call for a fully
staffed Emergency Operations Centre with expanded support as appropriate.

4.4       Brock Emergency Operations Centre Organizational Chart and Functional Roles

Brock University has adopted a Site Support based EOC model, with amendment as necessary to best suit
our organization. In the organizational chart below, positions in grey are commonly associated with an
EOC and have been described earlier. The organizational charts that follow are not intended to be
prescriptive, as additional resources (not depicted) may be invited to participate in the EOC as required.
Functions in red are unique to Brock and are described below:




As necessary, the Director of Emergency Management & Life Safety, may fill a role similar to that of
Deputy EOC Director. This position will support the EOC Director during major incidents, assisting with the
general operation and focus of the EOC in relation to operational objectives. The function of EOC Liaison
will also be performed by the Director of Emergency Management or their delegate.

The EOC Director Support will be staffed by the Executive Director – Office of the Vice-President
Administration and will provide all necessary support to the EOC Director and may coordinate/deliver
briefings for senior officials and develop associated documentation.

The functional role of Academic Liaison will be filled by the Provost and Vice-President Academic or
delegate. This is a critical role to ensure that the response is inclusive and considers (among other things):

      •   risks to faculty/students both short and long-term,
      •   challenges to the mission to deliver academic programming as well as student experience, and
                                                                                           24 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan

      •   continuity of academic programming.

Further, the Provost, or delegate, may add various positions that would report to them should it become
necessary to support an effective and efficient response. For example, the Provost (or delegate) may ask one
or more Vice-Provosts, Associate Vice-Presidents or Deans to participate in the EOC as the situation develops.
This may be more likely in protracted or Level 3 or 4 incident response scenarios, or those circumstances
where specific support or subject matter expertise is required, or in circumstances in which the impact of
the situation makes it reasonable to do so.

The EOC Director may request that the Vice-President Research, or delegate, assume a position in an
expanded EOC. Responsibilities would be similar to those of the Academic Liaison, with a focus on all
research related aspects. An expanded EOC could be staffed as outlined on the chart below with some or
all positions implemented as necessary.




As indicated earlier, IMS forms are available on the Emergency Management SharePoint site to support
the work of the Brock EOC. Although not necessary in all incidents, these forms are helpful to ensure that
the mission, objectives, and immediate action plans are developed. Brock staff with responsibility in an
EOC should maintain familiarity with the forms that may be most often relied upon, specifically:

      •   IMS 201:       Incident Briefing,
      •   IMS 202:       Incident Objectives,
      •   IMS 207:       Incident Organizational Chart, and
      •   IMS 1001:      Incident Action Plan

4.5       Emergency Assistance to the Brock Community

Dependent upon the scale of the incident, assistance and support may be required for students, staff,
faculty and/or members of the community at large. This will be considered during risk-specific planning
                                                                                               25 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

by the EOC Planning and Logistic Sections. In addition, the EOC may establish distinct working committees
to examine issues, develop plans and return recommendations for consideration.

An emergency on campus could result in a need for temporary shelter. Should a portion of a residence
complex or other facility no longer be suitable for occupancy, the Walker Complex may be used as a
temporary reception centre or shelter facility (for a brief period - generally less than 24 hours).

A temporary shelter plan may be developed by the EOC Planning and Logistic Sections, and should
consider:

      •   Reception and registration of students who are temporarily displaced from their on-campus
          housing,
      •   Locating students who are temporarily displaced by the emergency, but have not registered at
          the temporary shelter, including determining whether such students have been transferred off-
          site for medical attention,
      •   Establishing and maintaining a sign-in/sign-out registry for students who choose to leave the
          temporary shelter for alternate accommodation,
      •   Providing facilities for displaced students to contact family members to advise of their condition,
          and as necessary, implementing a process for family members to obtain information with respect
          to the health and welfare of their children/wards (see Annex 4-Inquiry Centre),
      •   Access to alternate sources of prescription medicines where the student’s supply is inaccessible
          due to the incident,
      •   Providing access to showers, restroom facilities, and blankets/bedding on a temporary basis,
      •   Providing emergency clothing, toiletries, meals, and funds,
      •   Support regarding lost/misplaced documentation,
      •   Where necessary, assisting in the implementation of transfers from the temporary shelter to
          other accommodation, and
      •   The provision of food/beverages should the temporary shelter be required for more than 6 hours.

4.6       External Resources

During an emergency, Brock University may access support from emergency service agencies, as well as
several public-sector organizations. Organizations that may play a role in response and recovery include
(but are not limited to):

      •   Local Canadian and American Police Organizations
      •   Regional Fire Coordinator
      •   Fire Department Dispatch
      •   Municipal Fire Services and Community Emergency Management Coordinators
      •   Niagara Region, including:
              o Emergency Planning
              o Community Services
              o EMS
              o Public Health
              o Environmental Health
              o Public Works (Transportation, Waste Mgt, Water and Waste Services)
              o Corporate Communications
      •   Emergency Management Ontario

                                                                                               26 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

      •   Red Cross
      •   The Salvation Army
      •   Victim Services Niagara
      •   Ministry Action Groups, including:
              o Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing
              o Ministry of Transportation
              o CANUTEC
              o Ministry of the Environment – Spills Action Centre
              o Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR)
              o Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs
              o Environment Canada Severe Weather Desk
      •   Niagara Peninsula Conservation Authority
      •   Niagara Health System
      •   Border Services, including:
              o Canada Border Services Agency
              o Land Border International Ports of Entry Canada
              o Niagara Falls Bridge Commission
      •   Cross Border Emergency Services, including:
               o Niagara County Emergency Services
              o Erie County Emergency Services
      •   Educational Institutions (Niagara College/District School Boards)
      •   Information Niagara – 211
      •   Private Sector
              o Enbridge Gas, Power Utilities
      •   Amateur Radio Emergency Services (ARES) Niagara
              o   Potential support for emergency communications, with established base station already
                  in place at the Kenmore Centre (CSS).

A list of organizations that may be available to support Brock University as well as current contact
information may be found within Annex 9, “Emergency Resource Database.” This includes the Niagara
Emergency Contact Directory, which provides confidential contact information for all local relevant
organizations and stakeholders. This directory is maintained by Niagara Region Emergency Management.
Should external resources be required, contact should generally be made by the assigned EOC Liaison
Officer.

4.7       Demobilization

Once the incident response objectives have been met, the Incident Commander or an EOC Director will
direct that incident responders and resources be released. This process is called demobilization.

The demobilization process should include:

      •   Releasing incident response personnel and resources as soon as they are no longer needed,
      •   A formal check-out procedure,
      •   Awareness of any mental and physical health and safety concerns with special emphasis on:
              o Incident response personnel who have worked the longest or performed exhausting tasks
                  who may need to be released first,
              o Formal or informal support that may be needed for incident response personnel who
                                                                                          27 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

                  have been exposed to extreme stress or trauma,
      •   The return of all equipment to the organization(s) who provided them,
      •   Storing all records, data, and final reports for future reference, and
      •   A plan for the transfer of ongoing recovery activities (if possible).

It is important to note that releasing personnel and other resources is not the end of demobilization. An
after-action review process offers important lessons for improvement. Demobilization should also
include:

      •   Hot wash/debrief activity
              o A hot wash is an informal debrief with involved personnel that should take place
                  immediately after the incident response ends,
              o A debrief is usually an in-person session to capture feedback from incident response
                  personnel that is often more structured and may take more time than a hot wash. Ideally,
                  a debrief will involve both an in-person and a written commentary component to allow
                  for feedback from those involved and should occur while the incident is still fresh in the
                  minds of those involved.
      •   After-action review is a process for:
              o Reviewing and documenting the performance of tasks during an incident, and
              o Making tangible recommendations in a report for improvement.
      •   Improvement planning for future incidents:
              o Taking recommendations from the after-action review process and best practices to
                  improve the management of future incidents.


At minimum, a hot wash should be conducted for all incidents that require an activation of a Brock
Emergency Operations Centre. A hot wash alone may be appropriate for incidents that are relatively
simple, including those that do not require a full EOC activation and/or are not protracted.

In some cases (such as those for which a response may be protracted), the EOC Director may request that
a mid-event debrief take place. Doing so may allow the organization to identify areas for improvement
and implement changes to processes without delay, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of the ongoing
response effort. Once the Incident Commander or an EOC Director has demobilized all resources, the
process of deactivation has begun. This represents an end of incident activities and the return to normal
operations.

4.8       Emergency Recovery

Once risks have been mitigated, the effort will transition from response to recovery. During this phase, it
will be a priority to ensure that there is an effective structure for the administration, coordination and/or
implementation of actions required to recover from the incident. The decision to transition to recovery
operations rests with the EOC Director.

Several options are open to the University with respect to managing recovery operations, all dependent
upon the nature and scale of the emergency. They include, but are not limited to the following:

      •   The EOC may remain activated in order to develop/implement a recovery plan. During this phase,
          unless exigent circumstances exist, recommendations on actions should be brought forward to
          senior staff for approval.
                                                                                               28 | P a g e
                                   Emergency Management Plan

      •   The EOC may remain activated and designate a recovery committee or working group to examine
          issues related to recovery and make appropriate recommendations. It will be the responsibility of
          this working group to develop plans and recommend actions to the EOC. As is the case in the
          previous model, unless exigent circumstances exist, recommendations adopted at the EOC level
          would be brought forward to senior staff for approval.
      •   The EOC may stand down and where necessary, a new committee focused on recovery may be
          struck. This committee would be responsible to identify outstanding issues and recommend
          actions to senior staff through a defined reporting structure.
      •   The EOC may stand down and senior staff will continue to provide leadership and strategic
          direction through the recovery phase.

4.9       Emergency Exercises

An exercise is a simulated emergency, in which Brock staff are asked to perform functions or roles that
would be expected of them if the emergency were real. This process provides an opportunity to develop
new or validate current plans and procedures, while raising awareness to prevention, mitigation,
preparedness, response, and recovery capabilities. In addition, outside agencies may participate in or
otherwise support emergency exercises at Brock, promoting an efficient and effective response capacity.

As an essential component of any emergency management program, exercises have three main functions:

      •   Validation: to validate plans, protocols, and procedures and demonstrate a capacity to effectively
          respond to emergencies.
      •   Training: to develop staff competencies, provide practice performing functions expected of staff
          and to assess/improve performance.
      •   Testing: to test well established procedures and identify/correct any gaps that exist.

Emergency exercises can be discussion or operations based. Discussion based exercises may include
seminars, workshops, table-top scenarios, or games. This format can highlight existing plans, policies and
procedures while familiarizing staff with current or expected capabilities. Brock has used this exercise
process to support the development of specific action plans, an example being the development of the
COVID-19 Outbreak Management Plan.

Operations based exercises are more complex, as they involve participants acting out their responses, as
opposed to discussing how they would respond. These exercises may be classed as functional or full scale.

A functional exercise tests the capability of individual or multiple emergency functions, with time
constraints, normally in an EOC environment. In this case, simulated events drive activity at the
management level within an EOC, however movement of personnel and equipment at site is simulated.
Responders are not actually actively participating in the exercise. Functional exercises can provide an
opportunity to:

      •   evaluate the response of an EOC and staff working within,
      •   reinforce established policies/procedures,
      •   measure adequacy of resources available, and to
      •   examine inter-jurisdictional relationships.



                                                                                              29 | P a g e
                                  Emergency Management Plan




A full-scale exercise is the most complex and costly exercise format. These exercises may involve more
than one organization and can be multi-jurisdictional. They are used to evaluate aspects of response and
recovery in an interactive manner. Events unfold in a scripted exercise scenario that has the flexibility to
allow updates to drive activities. The exercise occurs in real time with first responders deployed near the
event so that they may conduct their actions as if it were a real incident. Full scale exercises can provide
many opportunities to assess response, including but not limited to, organizational performance, inter-
organizational cooperation, and inter-operability across organizations.

As part of the emergency management program, Brock University conducts an emergency exercise on an
annual basis.




                                                                                              30 | P a g e
                                Emergency Management Plan

4.10    Emergency Plan Annex List and Additional Resources

A number of confidential annexes have been developed to support the response to any incident at Brock
University. A summary of each annex follows in the chart below:

       Annex      Description
         1        Emergency Alerting System
                      • This outlines the process by which an Emergency Operations Centre will be
                          activated at Brock and includes contact information for those who are
                          expected to fulfill various functional roles both in a primary and alternate
                          capacity.
         2        HIRA (Hazard Identification Risk Assessment)
                      • Similar to municipalities in Ontario, the University has prepared a Hazard
                          identification Risk Assessment, commonly referred to as a “HIRA.” Through
                          this process, hazards, and risks to the organization (and community) are
                          assessed. Based on this assessment, an organization can plan responses to
                          hazards and develop operational exercises to assess response readiness.
         3        Department Emergency Plans
                      • Various departments have completed emergency plans specific to their areas
                          of responsibility. These plans include specific information that includes
                          emergency contacts, general evacuation plans and muster points, evacuation
                          planning for persons who require assistance, and the identification of
                          essential functions and continuity planning.
         4        Inquiry Centre
                      • A procedure to respond and/or redirect inquiries when the capacity of the
                          University to do so may otherwise be overwhelmed given the nature and
                          scale of the incident.
         5        Emergency Communication Plan
                      • Marketing and Communications is responsible for the release of information
                          to the Brock community and the community at large. In a crisis situation,
                          Marketing and Communications may establish a Media Information Centre to
                          ensure effective communication.
         6        Emergency Shelter
                      • This plan outlines actions to be taken in the event that shelter is required for
                          on-campus residence students – both temporary and longer term.
         7        Medical Emergency Response Planning
                      • This annex describes the role and responsibility of Student Health Services in
                          both acute and long-term medical emergencies.
         8        Emergency Transportation
                      • This annex outlines considerations and actions to be taken should there be a
                          requirement to evacuate the University in situations where additional public
                          transportation is required.
         9        Emergency Resource Contact List
                      • This annex contains contact information for various emergency response
                          stakeholder groups




                                                                                           31 | P a g e
                                 Emergency Management Plan

In addition, the following specific plans have been developed to support Brock University’s response
capacity and remain available to Emergency Operations Centre staff as necessary:

   •    Pandemic Plan – Guiding Document (applicable to all pandemics),
   •    Pandemic Recovery General Guiding Document (COVID-19 specific),
   •    Outbreak Management Plan,
   •    Fire Safety Plans for each facility,
   •    Containment Lab (level 3) Standard Operating Procedures,
   •    Inclement Weather Procedures, and
   •    The Brock University Faculty Handbook (which includes provisions relating to the disruption of
        academic activities).




                                                                                           32 | P a g e
