City of Toronto
Emergency Plan
September 2024




Toronto Emergency Management
www.toronto.ca/oem




                               1
Table of Contents
1.0 Introduction ............................................................................................................... 3
2.0 Purpose ..................................................................................................................... 4
3.0 Scope ........................................................................................................................ 4
4.0 Legal Authorities........................................................................................................ 4
5.0 Planning Assumptions ............................................................................................... 5
6.0 Emergency Management Governance Structure ...................................................... 6
7.0 Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment ............................................................ 14
8.0 Preparedness Cycle ................................................................................................ 14
9.0 Concept of Operations ............................................................................................ 15
10.0 Recovery Operations............................................................................................. 22
11.0 Revision History .................................................................................................... 23




                                                                                                                                  2
1.0 Introduction
The City of Toronto is vulnerable to numerous hazards. The hazards can be natural
such as extreme weather, human-caused such as an incident at a special event or
cyber-attack, or technological such as those involving hazardous materials,
infrastructure disruptions, and utility and power failures.
The City of Toronto Emergency Plan establishes the framework that ensures the City is
prepared to deal with any of these hazards. It is the methodology through which the City
will mobilize its resources in the event of an emergency, thereby restoring the
municipality to a state of normalcy. The Plan is designed to ensure that all agencies
which may become involved in an emergency are aware of their respective roles and
responsibilities during that emergency and participate in the emergency management
program.
Additionally, the Emergency Plan makes provisions for the earliest possible coordinated
response to an emergency, an understanding of the personnel and resources available
to the City, and recognition that additional expertise and resources can be called upon if
required.
The Emergency Plan is utilized as a tool to assist emergency and municipal services
and officials in their emergency response activities to provide an efficient and effective
response to an emergency. The Plan must be flexible enough to adapt to a broad
spectrum of emergencies and must be supported with:
•   adequate personnel, equipment, and expertise from the response agencies
•   familiarity with contents of the Plan and its supporting documents by participating
    agencies
•   training and exercises
•   awareness of resources available from neighbouring municipalities and the private
    sector, supplemented by prearranged agreements
•   testing of the Plan on a regular basis
•   review of the Plan following an emergency or exercise where it was implemented
The Emergency Plan outlines how City agencies will respond to, recover from, and
mitigate the impact of an emergency. The Plan contains sections that describe legal
authorities, planning assumptions, concept of operations, operational life cycle,
organizational responsibilities, and the preparedness cycle.
Emergency Support Functions are supporting documents to the Emergency Plan that
provide structure for City divisions, agencies and corporations and outside stakeholders
that work collaboratively to provide coordinated support, resources and personnel
during an emergency response to an incident. The documents describe how the City’s
divisions, agencies and corporations and outside stakeholders coordinate to save lives,
protect property and the environment, restore essential services and critical
infrastructure, and help victims and communities return to normal following an
emergency.
Hazard-Specific Plans are also supporting documents to the Emergency Plan. They
contain specific response plans for hazards that may pose a threat to the City of


                                                                                             3
Toronto. These plans reflect the City of Toronto’s Hazard Identification and Risk
Assessment (see Section 7.0).

2.0 Purpose
The aim of the City of Toronto Emergency Plan is to provide the framework for
extraordinary arrangements and measures that can be taken to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Toronto when faced with an
emergency.
The Plan unifies the efforts of the City’s divisions, agencies and corporations and
outside stakeholders for a comprehensive and effective approach to response and
reduction of impact from an emergency. It is intended to increase the emergency
response capability of the City of Toronto by establishing a plan of action to deploy
emergency services efficiently and effectively.

3.0 Scope
This Emergency Plan and its supporting documents (Emergency Support Functions and
Hazard-Specific Plans) outline the coordinated response that the City of Toronto
undertakes in collaboration with its divisions, agencies and corporations and outside
stakeholders to ensure an effective response and recovery from an emergency.

4.0 Legal Authorities
Legislation under which the municipality, its employees and agents are authorized to
respond to an emergency are as follows:
•   City of Toronto Municipal Code, Chapter 59, Emergency Management ("Chapter
    59")
•   Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act
•   Ontario Regulation 380/04

4.1 Toronto Municipal Code, Chapter 59, Emergency
Management

The provisions of Chapter 59 provide the governance structure, including delegated
authorities, membership of the Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee
and reporting relationships to City Council.

4.2 Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act

The Emergency Management and Civil Protection Act is provincial legislation which,
among other subjects, imposes requirements on municipalities concerning their
emergency management program. Section 2.1 of the Act requires municipalities to



                                                                                        4
develop and implement an emergency management program and adopt it through by-
law. An emergency management program must consist of:
•   an emergency plan
•   training programs and exercises for employees of municipalities and other persons
    with respect to the provision of required services and procedures to be followed in
    emergency response and recovery activities,
•   public education on risks to public safety and on public preparedness for
    emergencies, and
•   any other element required by standards for emergency management programs that
    may be developed by the Solicitor General
In developing the emergency management program, the municipality must identify and
assess various hazards and risks to public safety that could give rise to emergencies
and identify the facilities and other elements of the infrastructure that are at risk of being
affected by emergencies. Each municipality must conduct training programs and
exercises to ensure the readiness of employees of the municipality and other persons to
act under the emergency plan. Each municipality shall review and, if necessary, revise
its emergency plan on an annual basis.

5.0 Planning Assumptions
•   An emergency is defined under the Emergency Management and Civil Protection
    Act as a situation or an impending situation that constitutes a danger of major
    proportions that could result in serious harm to persons or substantial damage to
    property and that is caused by the forces of nature, a disease or other health risk, an
    accident or an act whether intentional or otherwise.
•   During regular operations, Incidents (Level 1) are within the response capabilities of
    the City and its divisions, agencies, and corporations. A Level 2 or 3 (Emergency or
    Major Emergency) will likely strain the City’s capabilities and require provincial
    and/or federal assistance (see Section 9.2).
•   An emergency in the City may occur with little or no warning and may escalate more
    rapidly than response organizations can manage.
•   An emergency may cause injury, fatalities, property loss, and disruption of normal
    support systems. A large number of casualties, heavy damage to buildings and
    basic infrastructure, and disruption of essential public services may stress the
    capabilities of the City to meet the needs of the situation.
•   Achieving and maintaining effective resident and community preparedness reduces
    the immediate demands on response organizations. Public awareness and
    education programs are required to ensure residents will take appropriate advance
    actions to reduce their vulnerability especially during the first 72 hours of an
    emergency.
•   When the City’s resources are strained, additional resources may be requested
    through mutual assistance agreements with neighbouring municipalities and/or
    through requests to the provincial and federal governments.




                                                                                            5
•   The Emergency Operations Centre will be activated and staffed to manage the
    strategic response to the emergency and to support emergency operations at the
    site.
•   Members of the Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee will be
    required to mobilize on short notice to provide timely and effective direction or
    assistance.
•   If activated, members of the Emergency Management Working Group (the "Working
    Group") will identify staff from their division, agency or corporation to attend the
    Emergency Operations Centre.
•   Each division, agency or corporation will track, document and seek reimbursement,
    as appropriate, for costs incurred during emergency response and recovery
    operations.

6.0 Emergency Management
Governance Structure
6.1 Toronto Emergency Management Program
Committee

Chapter 59 defines the composition of the Toronto Emergency Management Program
Committee.
Composition
The Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee consists of representatives
holding positions in the City, its divisions, agencies, and corporations, or those
designated to act on their behalf.
The membership of the Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee includes
the following positions or such successor titles as outlined in Chapter 59:
•   Mayor
•   Deputy Mayor
•   City Manager
•   Deputy City Manager, Community and Social Services
•   Deputy City Manager, Corporate Services
•   Deputy City Manager, Infrastructure Services
•   Fire Chief and General Manager, Toronto Fire Services
•   Chief and General Manager, Toronto Paramedic Services
•   Medical Officer of Health
•   Chief Communications Officer
•   Chief People Officer
•   General Manager, Transportation Services
•   General Manager, Toronto Water
•   General Manager, Toronto Shelter and Support Services


                                                                                       6
•   City Solicitor
•   Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
•   Chief Building Official and Executive Director, Toronto Building
•   General Manager, Parks, Forestry and Recreation
•   General Manager, Solid Waste Management Services
•   General Manager, Corporate Real Estate Management
•   Chief Technology Officer
•   Director, Insurance and Risk Management
•   Executive Director, Toronto Emergency Management
•   City Clerk
•   Executive Director, Environment and Climate
•   Executive Director, Engineering and Construction Services
•   Chief of Police
•   Chief General Manager, Toronto Transit Commission
•   Chief Executive Officer and Secretary Treasurer, Toronto and Region Conservation
    Authority
•   Executive Vice-President, Toronto Hydro
The Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee has identified the following
positions as informal “appointed members”1:
•   Deputy City Manager, Development and Growth Services
•   Chief Information Security Officer
•   Executive Director, Customer Experience Division
Objectives of the Toronto Emergency Management Program
Committee
The City of Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee provides the City
with an effective vehicle for developing and maintaining a comprehensive emergency
management program, as defined under the Emergency Management and Civil
Protection Act and Chapter 59.
Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee Control Group
In the event of an emergency, the Toronto Emergency Management Program
Committee Control Group (the "Control Group") convenes as it becomes reactive. The
membership of the Control Group remains the same as the Toronto Emergency
Management Program Committee.
The Mayor; or in the absence or unavailability of the Mayor, the City Manager; or,
alternatively a designate for the Mayor, or City Manager as may be required, will act as
Chair of the Control Group as specified in Chapter 59. The Control Group will provide



1 Changes to the formal membership of the Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee must

be approved by updating Chapter 59 through Council authority. As an interim measure, on June 3, 2024,
the Committee appointed additional informal members to attend meetings. These appointed members
provide advice and expertise but do not have voting rights.


                                                                                                    7
overall policy and strategic direction to the Emergency Operations Centre to support the
evolving response activities on the road to recovery.
The Emergency Operations Centre will coordinate the City's response to the emergency
using the Incident Management System. The foundation of the Incident Management
System is the collaboration and coordination in the establishment of goals, the setting of
priorities and the assignment of resources to effectively manage the emergency.
Authority of Control Group
Under section 59-7.1, of Chapter 59 in the event of an emergency, whether declared or
not under the Act, the Control Group is authorized to:
•   initiate, coordinate, direct and otherwise bring about the implementation of the Plan
    and undertake such other activities as they consider necessary to address the
    emergency
•   expend funds for the purposes of responding to and recovering from the emergency,
    including obtaining and distributing emergency materials, equipment and supplies,
    notwithstanding the requirements of any by-law governing the commitment of funds
    and the payment of accounts
•   obtain volunteer support from public agencies and other persons as considered
    necessary and to indemnify such agencies, their personnel, and other persons
    engaged in work that has been authorized pursuant to this Chapter or any other law,
    from liability for any acts or omissions resulting from any actions taken pursuant to
    this Chapter or any other law
Role of Chair, Control Group
The Chair of the Control Group is responsible for initiating, coordinating and directing
activities that the Control Group considers necessary to respond to the emergency
including, but not limited to:
•   taking actions considered necessary to implement the Emergency Plan and to
    protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and protect property, government
    infrastructure, and the environment; these actions are not contrary to law or the
    responsibilities and authorities of the Chief of Police, Fire Chief and General
    Manager, Medical Officer of Health and/or Chief Building Official and Executive
    Director of Toronto Building
•   ensuring that a designated City spokesperson is appointed to provide a coordinated
    approach in directing public information activities during the initial phase of the
    emergency
•   coordinating communications between the Mayor's Office and/or Council and the
    Control Group on the necessary actions being taken
•   determining if municipal resources are adequate or if further resources are required
•   providing advice on an emergency declaration and terminating an emergency
•   ensuring that when required, assistance be facilitated from other levels of
    government
•   liaising with other levels of government on areas of collaboration and cooperation




                                                                                           8
6.2 Notifying City Manager of Emergency

The Deputy City Manager, Infrastructure Services, or their designate contacts the City
Manager to report that the City of Toronto Emergency Operations Centre has been
activated. Depending on the nature of the emergency, the Executive Director, Toronto
Emergency Management, or any member of the Toronto Emergency Management
Program Committee may notify the City Manager of an impending or actual emergency
and request activation of the Emergency Operations Centre.

6.3 Emergency Management Working Group

Composition
Chapter 59 defines the composition of the Emergency Management Working Group
("Working Group") as those individuals selected by the Toronto Emergency
Management Program Committee. Under this authority, the Committee has designated
that the Working Group will consist of director-level representatives from the following
divisions, agencies and corporations:
•   Children’s Services
•   City Clerk's Office
•   City Manager’s Office
•   Corporate Real Estate Management
•   Customer Experience
•   Deputy City Manager’s Office, Community and Social Services
•   Deputy City Manager’s Office, Corporate Services
•   Deputy City Manager’s Office, Development and Growth Services
•   Deputy City Manager’s Office, Infrastructure Services
•   Economic Development and Culture
•   Employment and Social Services
•   Engineering and Construction Services
•   Environment and Climate
•   Exhibition Place
•   Fleet Services
•   Housing Secretariat
•   Office of the Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer
•   Office of the Chief Information Security Officer
•   Municipal Licensing and Standards
•   Parks, Forestry and Recreation
•   People and Equity
•   Purchasing and Materials Management
•   Seniors Services and Long-Term Care
•   Shelter, Support and Housing Administration
•   Social Development, Finance and Administration


                                                                                           9
•   Solid Waste Management Services
•   Strategic Public and Employee Communications
•   Technology Services
•   Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
•   Toronto Building
•   Toronto Community Housing
•   Toronto Emergency Management (Chair)
•   Toronto Fire Services
•   Toronto Hydro
•   Toronto Paramedic Services
•   Toronto Parking Authority
•   Toronto Police Service
•   Toronto Public Health
•   Toronto Public Library
•   Toronto Seniors Housing Corporation
•   Toronto Shelter and Support Services
•   Toronto Transit Commission
•   Toronto Water
•   Transportation Services
Toronto Emergency Management coordinates with the Committee to identify the
appropriate representatives and maintains a contact list of the Working Group
members, along with two alternates for each member.

6.4 Authority to Activate the Emergency Operations
Centre

Any member of the Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee or Working
Group has the authority and responsibility to request an activation of the Emergency
Operations Centre and initiate the implementation of the Emergency Plan. Requests to
activate the Emergency Operations Centre are directed to either the Executive Director,
Toronto Emergency Management or to Toronto Emergency Management's 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week On-Call Function.
Should an incident be classified as a Level 2 Emergency or Level 3 Major Emergency,
the Toronto Emergency Management On-Call Function is contacted by Toronto Fire
Services, Toronto Police Service and/or Toronto Paramedic Services. Toronto
Emergency Management staff would connect with the Deputy City Manager,
Infrastructure Services, to initiate the implementation of the Emergency Plan.
The City of Toronto uses a three-tier emergency level system to determine appropriate
notifications as follows:
•   Level 1 – Incident
•   Level 2 – Emergency
•   Level 3 – Major Emergency


                                                                                     10
Upon receiving an emergency notification, the Toronto Emergency Management 24/7
On-Call Function will liaise with the notifying division, agencies or corporation and utilize
the Emergency Level Notifications table (see Section 9.2) as a tool to assist in
establishing the immediate notifications that may be necessary and/or appropriate.

6.5 Staffing the Emergency Operations Centre

The Emergency Operations Centre ensures that the Control Group can uphold core
functions of the Emergency Plan, including:
•   effective policy and strategic direction to the emergency
•   support of emergency operations at the site(s)
•   consequence management
•   resource management to support the site(s)
•   coordination of management links to other Command/Divisional Operations Centres,
    external agencies and the Provincial Emergency Operations Centre
•   provide information to the public and the news media
•   maintain business continuity for the rest of the City
During a response, select members of the Working Group will establish and convene at
the Emergency Operations Centre to activate these functions. The Emergency
Operations Centre staff will provide operational guidance and support to the Incident
Commander who maintains the lead role at a site. When divisions establish Divisional
Operations Centres to provide operational support during an emergency response,
there is a need to centralize efforts and coordinate operational response between all
responding divisions. This function is provided by the City's Emergency Operations
Centre.
The City's Emergency Operations Centre staffing plan ensures that the Emergency
Operations Centre is always operationally ready for activation. Staff are required to take
pre-requisite training to enable an effective and efficient implementation of Emergency
Operations Centre initiatives through the Incident Management System.

6.6 Role of Emergency Operations Centre Director

The Emergency Operations Centre Director has overall authority and responsibility for
activities of the Emergency Operations Centre and for ensuring organizational
effectiveness. The Emergency Operations Centre Director establishes the Emergency
Operations Centre’s staffing levels, sets the Emergency Operations Centre priorities
and objectives for each operational period and ensures objectives are carried out. The
Emergency Operations Centre Director briefs the Control Group and other senior
officials, as required, and directs appropriate public information in coordination with the
Chief Communications Officer.




                                                                                          11
6.7 Site Response and Emergency Operations Centre
Support

The Emergency Operations Centre maintains a dedicated facility from which the City of
Toronto coordinates its strategic response to an emergency. The Emergency
Operations Centre coordinates the management of resources, personnel and incident
information.
The Emergency Operations Centre does not replace the need for a sound command
structure at the site; instead, it complements the site with further coordination, resource
management, information management and overall support.

6.8 Toronto Police Service Major Incident Command
Centre

The Toronto Police Service Major Incident Command Centre is a central point of
command, control, communication, and information for the Toronto Police Service.
When activated, the Major Incident Command Centre's Incident Commander has a full
perspective of all resources under the command of the Toronto Police Service and
tactical oversight of those resources in their function of ensuring public safety and
security.
When activated, the Major Incident Command Centre is responsible for the continuity of
policing services throughout the City of Toronto and for liaising with the City's
Emergency Operations Centre (if activated) which provides links to all City divisions,
agencies and corporations.
During a Major Incident Command Centre activation, Toronto Emergency Management
may send a representative to convene at the Major Incident Command Centre and act
as a Liaison Officer.
Toronto Fire Services, Toronto Paramedic Services, the Toronto Transit Commission
and other external partners may also attend the Major Incident Command Centre to
oversee coordination of their respective services with Toronto Police Service
operations.

6.9 Councillor Roles in an Emergency

The Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee approved the Councillor
Coordination Emergency Support Function in 2015. This Emergency Support Function
outlines when and how Councillors' Offices are notified of an activation of the
Emergency Operations Centre. It outlines protocols for regular communication with
Councillors during a Level 2 Emergency or a Level 3 Major Emergency. The Emergency
Support Function also outlines the councillors' requirements for keeping contact
information for themselves and their staff up to date and responding to the quarterly


                                                                                         12
requirement to confirm their information for the mass notification system. It specifies
parameters for training of appropriate parties, including councillors and their staff, City
Clerk's Office and Toronto Emergency Management.
The Councillor Coordination Emergency Support Function also outlines the role of the
councillors' offices throughout an emergency. For example, during a Level 2 Emergency
or Level 3 Major Emergency, councillors leverage formal and informal community
networks to help disseminate the information provided by the Emergency Operations
Centre Councillor Coordination Liaison. They also report urgent matters to the
Councillor Coordination Liaison for escalation to the appropriate parties.

6.10 Standardized Response Goals

A response goal is a broad statement that describes a desired outcome. Priorities for
response goals generally focus on eliminating or minimizing impacts of the incident on
people, property, and financial resources.
Emergency Operations Centre staff ensure that all levels of the response management
system adhere to standardized response goals in the following order of priority:
•   provide for the safety and health of responders
•   save lives
•   reduce suffering
•   protect public health
•   protect government infrastructure
•   protect property
•   protect the environment
•   reduce economic and social losses

6.11 External Organizations – Private Sector Partners

Depending on the nature of the emergency, external organizations may be asked to
provide a representative (e.g., Enbridge, Greater Toronto Airport Authority, Canadian
National or Canadian Pacific Rail, etc.) to join the Emergency Operations Centre to
assist in coordinating the response.

6.12 Divisional Emergency Management

To fully implement the emergency management program horizontally and vertically
throughout the City of Toronto's organizational structure, it is recommended that those
divisions with membership on Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee
and/or Working Group have a designated staff member(s), with roles and
responsibilities included in formal job descriptions. This increases the City of Toronto's
ability to mitigate, prepare, respond, and recover from emergencies and major




                                                                                          13
emergencies and begin the process of embedding an emergency management and
business continuity culture to routine business processes and program considerations.

7.0 Hazard Identification and Risk
Assessment
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment is an evaluation method used to understand
hazards. This method helps determine which hazards are most likely to result in an
emergency and allows for the comparison of risk between hazards.
Toronto Emergency Management has identified and assessed the various hazards and
risks to public safety that could give rise to emergencies and has identified the facilities
and other elements of the infrastructure that are at risk of being affected by
emergencies. Toronto Emergency Management has developed Emergency Support
Functions and Hazard-Specific Plans based on this assessment.
There are three major categories of hazards that may pose a threat to the City of
Toronto:
•   natural hazards are hazards that are caused by forces of nature; human activity may
    trigger or worsen the hazard
•   human-caused hazards are hazards that result from direct human action or inaction,
    either intentional or unintentional
•   technological hazards are hazards that arise from the manufacture, transportation,
    and use of substances such as radioactive materials, chemicals, explosives, and
    flammables
The top 10 risks for the City of Toronto are:
•   energy emergency (supply)
•   explosions / fires
•   winter weather
•   pandemic
•   cyber threats
•   terrorism
•   epidemic
•   flood
•   fuel/ natural gas supply disruption
•   extreme heat

8.0 Preparedness Cycle
The Emergency Plan is maintained, reviewed, and updated according to a
preparedness cycle that includes four phases: plan, operate, evaluate, and take
corrective action. The Toronto Emergency Management Program Committee provides
oversight of the Plan during all phases of the preparedness cycle, ensuring the Plan
aligns with the City's current policies, organizational structures, and methodologies.



                                                                                          14
Diagram Description: This diagram depicts the maintenance schedule of the Emergency
Plan
                           Plan
                           Ana lysis
        Conduct                                       Conduct
                         Assessment
        Training                                      Training
                            Audit


            Corrective Action                      Operate
       Tra ck
  Assign Actions                                                  Rea l World
                                                Exercise
   Review Pla ns                                                  Response
    Pla n Aga in
                                                   Lessons         After Action
                           Evaluate                Learned         Reports
         Conduct              Pla ns                   Conduct
         Training          Procedures                  Training
                             Policies


9.0 Concept of Operations
9.1 General

The City’s emergency services (Toronto Police Service, Toronto Fire Services, and
Toronto Paramedic Services) and other divisions, agencies and corporations manage
many incidents that occur on a day-to-day basis. As the magnitude of an emergency
increases, so will the requirement for additional support from within the City. The City’s
Emergency Operations Centre may be activated to provide support. The Control Group
may elect to call upon neighbouring municipalities to provide mutual assistance in
accordance with standing agreements. The City may also call upon the provincial
government to provide supplemental financial and/or physical resources necessary to
deal with the overall impacts of the emergency.
The City’s Emergency Plan adopts the principles of the Incident Management System.
The Incident Management System is a standardized approach to emergency
management that encompasses personnel, facilities, equipment, procedures, and
communications operating within a common organizational structure. Incident
Management System concepts and principles include comprehensive resource
management, action planning, integrated communications, interoperability, a modular
and scalable framework, standard terminology, and span of control.
The five major sections of the Incident Management System (Command, Operations,
Planning, Logistics and Finance & Administration) can be expanded or contracted to
meet requirements as an event progresses. When activated, the City of Toronto staff
who fill these roles are referred to as an Incident Management Team.




                                                                                        15
The response to an emergency in the City will be managed using the Toronto
Emergency Plan and any relevant Emergency Support Functions and Hazard-Specific
Plans with the following assumptions:
•     the Head of each division, agency and corporation is responsible for the overall
      operation of their organization
•     use of mutual aid assistance for cooperative response will be entered into and
      maintained with adjoining municipalities for the purpose of reciprocal assistance
•     normal communication modes and reporting channels will be used to the maximum
      practical extent; back-up communications systems will be used in the event that
      commercial communications systems are disrupted, saturated, or otherwise
      unavailable
•     City divisions will employ their standard business continuity and business
      resumption planning principles to ensure the continuity of essential services
•     day-to-day functions that do not contribute directly to the operation may be
      suspended for the duration of the emergency; efforts that would normally be required
      of those day-to-day functions will be redirected to accomplish the emergency task

9.2 Emergency Levels

Most emergencies are managed at site by emergency services and other divisions,
agencies, and corporations, and are considered routine operations. Emergencies of
greater magnitude do happen from time to time and require an emergency management
response structure beyond normal daily operations. The required response must be
appropriate to the magnitude of the incident and follow the notification system as
defined in the following Emergency Level Notifications table.
Table 1: Emergency Level Notifications
    Level 1 – Incident
    Operational             This level requires coordination, collaboration and/or
    Implications            communications for one or a combination of the following:
                            •   effective policy and strategic direction to the emergency
                            •   support of emergency operations at the site(s)
                            •   consequence management
                            •   resource management
                            •   coordination of management linkages to the site,
                                Divisional Operations Centre(s), external agencies and
                                the Provincial Emergency Operations Centre
                            •   information to the public and news media
                            •   business continuity for the rest of the City
    Toronto Emergency       Support available through 24/7 On-Call Function.
    Management Support




                                                                                            16
City Division         Lead division(s) will follow established notification and
Notification          escalation procedures to their chain of command.
Toronto Emergency     No notifications required as division(s) will follow established
Management            internal notification and escalation procedures.
Notification          If Toronto Emergency Management is activated to monitor, it
                      will notify members of the Control Group, Emergency
                      Management Working Group, Strategic Public and
                      Employee Communications, City Clerk's Office and other
                      divisions, agencies and corporations.
Examples              Localized power disruptions, severe weather watches and
                      warnings, localized flooding, Emergency Social Services
                      coordination and response.
Level 2 – Emergency
Operational           This level requires coordination, collaboration and/or
Implications          communications for one or a combination of the following:
                      •   effective policy and strategic direction to the emergency
                      •   support of emergency operations at the site(s)
                      •   consequence management
                      •   resource management
                      •   coordination of management linkages to the site,
                          Divisional Operations Centre, external agencies and the
                          Provincial Emergency Operations Centre
                      •   information to the public and news media
                      •   business continuity for the rest of the City
Toronto Emergency     Toronto Emergency Management will:
Management Support
                      •   facilitate access to City divisions/external agencies
                          and/or
                      •   facilitate integration of City divisions/external agencies
                          into the Incident Management System in the Emergency
                          Operations Centre and/or
                      •   attend site as a Liaison Officer
City Division         Lead divisions will follow established notification and
Notification          escalation procedures to their chain of command and
                      Toronto Emergency Management.




                                                                                      17
Toronto Emergency     Toronto Emergency Management will notify:
Management
                      •     Deputy City Manager, Infrastructure Services
Notification
                      •     City Clerk's Office
                      •     Strategic Public and Employee Communications
                      •     Control Group, Emergency Management Working Group
                            and Emergency Social Services Working Group
                      Strategic Public and Employee Communications will activate
                      the Emergency Information and Media Relations Emergency
                      Support Function
                      The City Clerk's Office will notify Councillors of the activation
                      of the Emergency Operations Centre and the Councillor
                      Coordination Emergency Support Function.
Examples              High-rise(s) or large area evacuation, major road(s)
                      washout/closures, emergency social services reception
                      centre, large power outage (2010 - 200 Wellesley St., 2013
                      – July 8 flooding).
Level 3 – Major Emergency
Operational           This level requires coordination, collaboration and/or
Implications          communications for ALL of the following purposes:
                      •     effective policy and strategic direction to the emergency
                      •     support of emergency operations at the site(s)
                      •     consequence management
                      •     resource management
                      •     co-ordination of management linkages to the site,
                            Divisional Operations Centre, external agencies and the
                            Provincial Emergency Operations Centre
                      •     information to the public and news media
                      •     business continuity for the rest of the City
Toronto Emergency     Toronto Emergency Management may;
Management Support
                      •     facilitate access to City divisions/external agencies
                            and/or
                      •     facilitate integration of City divisions/external agencies
                            into the Incident Management System in the Emergency
                            Operations Centre and/or
                      •     attend site as a Liaison Officer
City Division         Lead divisions will follow established notification and
Notification          escalation procedures to their chain of command and
                      Toronto Emergency Management.




                                                                                        18
 Toronto Emergency          Toronto Emergency Management will notify:
 Management
                            •   Deputy City Manager, Infrastructure Services
 Notification
                            •   City Clerk's Office
                            •   Strategic Public and Employee Communications
                            •   the Control Group, Emergency Management Working
                                Group, and Emergency Social Services Working Group
                            •   the Provincial Emergency Operations Centre
                            Strategic Public and Employee Communications will activate
                            the Emergency Information and Media Relations Emergency
                            Support Function.
                            The City Clerk's Office will notify Councillors of the activation
                            of the Emergency Operations Centre and the activation of
                            the Councillor Coordination Emergency Support Function.
                            The Clerk's Office will follow established protocols set out in
                            the Councillor Coordination Emergency Support Function.
 Examples                   Nuclear incident, COVID-19 pandemic, city-wide power
                            outage, severe storm/weather

9.3 Emergency Support Functions

Councillor Coordination
The Councillor Coordination Emergency Support Function establishes when and how
City Clerk's and Councillors' Offices are notified of an activation of the Emergency
Operations Centre. It outlines protocols for regular communication with Councillors
during a Level 2 Emergency or a Level 3 Major Emergency. It specifies parameters for
training for appropriate parties, including Councillors and their staff, City Clerk's Office
staff and Toronto Emergency Management staff.
Animal Care and Relief Services
Animal care and relief is coordinated by Toronto Animal Services in the Municipal
Licensing & Standards Division and delivered by pre-identified animal care and relief
responders with pre-determined roles that come together to provide these services in
emergencies. The Animal Care and Relief Services Emergency Support Function
outlines the response provided to service and companion animals that are displaced or
otherwise affected by an emergency and provides an overview of roles and
responsibilities.
Damage Assessment
The purpose of the Damage Assessment Emergency Support Function is to define the
roles and responsibilities of City of Toronto divisions, agencies and corporations in order
to provide guidance to staff related to the inspection and reporting on the condition of
buildings, designated structures and municipal infrastructure.



                                                                                           19
Debris Management
The Debris Management Emergency Support Function defines the roles and
responsibilities of divisions, agencies and corporations for the management (removal
and disposition) of debris following an incident. The purpose of this Emergency Support
Function is to mitigate against any potential threat to lives, health, safety and welfare of
the impacted citizens, expedite search and rescue and/or recovery efforts of impacted
area(s).
Emergency Donations Management
This Emergency Donations Management Emergency Support Function applies to
financial contributions and donated goods. It guides emergency donations management
during an emergency response. It does not include offers of personal service or labour.
Emergency Information and Media Relations
The Emergency Information and Media Relations Emergency Support Function outlines
the role of the Strategic Public and Employee Communications Division during an
emergency and supports the City of Toronto’s efforts to assist Toronto residents in
coping with, and recovering from, a Level 2 Emergency or Level 3 Major Emergency.
The Strategic Public and Employee Communications Division is responsible for
implementation and oversight of the City of Toronto's communications activities. The
Division will provide advice to the City's divisions, agencies and corporations as
required, or as directed by the City Manager.
Strategic Public and Employee Communications is responsible for communicating
critical information before an impending incident (if applicable), during and after a major
disaster or public emergency on behalf of the Emergency Operations Centre and City
officials to 311 Toronto, City staff, members of Council, community leaders, residents,
businesses and the media.
This Emergency Support Function addresses the principles, planning assumptions and
concept of operations for emergency information, issues management and media
relations for a potential or imminent emergency.
If the emergency involves multiple jurisdictions, communications may be joint where
necessary or appropriate. In the event of a major public emergency that requires a
provincial and/or federal response, Strategic Public and Employee Communications will
coordinate City of Toronto communications with provincial and federal officials as
appropriate.
Emergency Social Services
The Emergency Social Services Emergency Support Function outlines the response
provided when residents are displaced or otherwise affected by an emergency. This
Emergency Support Function guides the Emergency Social Services response provided
during a Level 1 – Incident up to a Level 3 – Major Emergency.
This Emergency Support Function does not include services for people who require
immediate medical care. When evacuees who need immediate medical assistance are
identified, services are provided by Toronto Paramedic Services through 911 calls and


                                                                                          20
other procedures. Long-term housing is also outside the scope of this Emergency
Support Function.
Evacuation
This Emergency Support Function deals with planning and preparing for a decision to
evacuate an area in the event of an emergency or pending emergency, a description of
responsibilities to conduct the evacuation, and the process for re-entry. It includes a
description of the responsibilities of staff, agencies and procedures involved in alerting
the community of the need to evacuate, movement of the population during the
evacuation and re-entry of the population once the affected area is deemed safe.
Since emergencies and pending emergencies are diverse in nature, it is difficult to
create a plan that has a detailed account of the duties involved. The aim of this
document is to provide guidance for the responsibilities that will ensure the safety and
security of the community during an emergency evacuation.
Mass Casualty
The Mass Casualty Emergency Support Function describes a coordinated and effective
approach to providing health and medical assistance in the immediate aftermath of a
mass casualty emergency that impedes routine health and medical services within the
City of Toronto. It provides direction for responding to mass casualty needs following an
emergency. Assistance provided under this Emergency Support Function is directed by
Toronto Paramedic Services and is supported by several agencies within the City as
well as the coordination between the agencies and private healthcare service providers.
Traffic Management
The Traffic Management Emergency Support Function describes the transportation
resources (facilities, equipment, materials, supplies, and human and technical
information) that support the City’s ability to implement an emergency transportation
response. The aim of this Emergency Support Function is to provide the inter-Divisional
and inter-agency operational support responsibilities that will ensure the safety and
security of first responders, the general public and visitors to the City of Toronto.
Volunteer Management
The purpose of this Emergency Support Function is to facilitate and coordinate the
placement of unaffiliated volunteers to assist in an emergency. It defines the roles and
responsibilities within the volunteer coordination plan and provides guidance to Human
Resources as the lead division for volunteer coordination.

9.4 Hazard-Specific Plans

The City of Toronto develops hazard-specific plans to complement its all-hazards
planning. These plans address the unique risks, vulnerabilities, and response actions
required for specific hazards, clarifying how roles, resources, and coordination may
differ during various emergencies.
The City has developed hazard-specific plans for the following hazards:


                                                                                           21
•   Extreme Heat Emergency Coordination Plan
•   Extreme Winter Weather Coordination Plan
•   Flood Coordination Plan
•   Nuclear Emergency Response Plan
•   Power Disruption Plan
Divisions, agencies, and corporations may also develop plans for specific hazards that
complement their all-hazards plans and procedures.

10.0 Recovery Operations
Recovery planning identifies issues, coordinates resources, ensures information is
accurate and reliable, and works to restore utilities and other services in a timely
manner. It provides an accountable, transparent process that ensures recovery services
are accessible and applied in a consistent manner City-wide.
Recovery is a coordinated process of supporting affected communities in the
reconstruction of the physical infrastructure and restoration of emotional, social,
economic and physical wellbeing.




                                                                                      22
11.0 Revision History
Rev.                                                                        Revision
               Revised by                           Details
No.                                                                           Date
       City of Toronto, Office of
                                     Plan Development and Report to
1      Emergency Management                                                May 2005
                                     Committee.
       (OEM)
2      City of Toronto, OEM          Plan Review.                          May 2006
       City of Toronto, OEM:
3                                    Plan Review.                          June 2007
       W. Leonard, J. Smysnuik
       City of Toronto, OEM:
                                                                           August
4      W. Leonard, J. Smysnuik,      Plan Revision/Edit.
                                                                           2008
       G. Symonds

       City of Toronto, OEM:         Plan Revision as per by-law
5                                    revisions and report to Executive     April 2009
       W. Leonard, J. Smysnuik       Committee.
       City of Toronto, OEM:         Plan Revision as per by-law
                                                                           October
6      L. Chandler, W. Leonard, J.   revisions and report to Executive
                                                                           2011
       Kilgour, W. Banon             Committee.

       City of Toronto, OEM:         Plan Revision as per by-law
                                     revisions and reported to Toronto December
7      L. Chandler, W. Leonard, J.   Emergency Management Program 2011
       Kilgour, W. Banon             Committee.

       City of Toronto, OEM:         Plan Revision as per by-law
                                     revisions and reported to Toronto October
8      L. Chandler, W. Leonard, J.   Emergency Management Program 2012
       Kilgour, W. Banon             Committee.
       City of Toronto, OEM:         Emergency Levels Table as per         February
9
       W. Banon                      Ombudsman Report.                     2013
                                     Annual update and revisions as
                                     per changes to the Municipal
       City of Toronto, OEM:         Code, Chapter 59. Minor
                                     language clarifications to Sections   December
10     J. Kilgour, B. Eyre, W.       6.3 and 6.7 as presented to           2013
       Banon                         Toronto Emergency Management
                                     Program Committee, December
                                     19, 2013.




                                                                                      23
Rev.                                                                      Revision
                Revised by                        Details
No.                                                                         Date
                                     Annual update and revisions as
       City of Toronto, OEM:         per changes to the Municipal
                                                                         December
11                                   Code, Chapter 59. EMWG
       J. Kilgour, D. Clark                                              2014
                                     feedback, and reported to Toronto
                                     Emergency Program Committee.
       City of Toronto, OEM:         Annual Update and revisions as
       L. Chandler, T. Griffin, J.   per the Municipal Code, Chapter
       Kilgour, S. Waters            59, Emergency Management
                                                                     December
12                                   Working Group (EMWG)
       City of Toronto, Strategic                                    2015
                                     feedback, and Toronto
       Communications:               Emergency Management Program
       J. DeSouza, W. Brown          Committee approval.
                                     Annual Update and revisions as
       City of Toronto, OEM:         per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                     59, Emergency Management            September
13     L. Chandler, T. Griffin, J.   Working Group feedback, and         2016
       Kilgour, S. Waters            Toronto Emergency Management
                                     Program Committee approval.
                                     Annual Update and revisions as
       City of Toronto, OEM:         per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                     59, Emergency Management            September
14     L. Chandler, T. Griffin, D.   Working Group feedback, and         2017
       Clark                         Toronto Emergency Management
                                     Program Committee approval.
                                     Annual update and revisions as
       City of Toronto, OEM          per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                                                         December
15     T. Griffin, J. Smysnuik, C.   59 and Toronto Emergency
                                                                         2020
       O’Sullivan                    Management Program Committee
                                     approval.
                                     Annual update and revisions as
       City of Toronto, OEM          per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                                                         December
16     C. O’Sullivan, W. Banon, J.   59 and Toronto Emergency
                                                                         2021
       Beaven-Desjardins             Management Program Committee
                                     approval.
                                     Annual update and revisions as
       City of Toronto, OEM          per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                                                         November
17     C. O’Sullivan, J. Beaven-     59 and Toronto Emergency
                                                                         2022
       Desjardins                    Management Program Committee
                                     approval.




                                                                                 24
Rev.                                                                 Revision
                  Revised by                  Details
No.                                                                    Date

       City of Toronto, Toronto   Annual update and revisions as
       Emergency Management       per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                                                    November
18     (TEM)                      59, and Toronto Emergency
                                                                    2023
                                  Management Program Committee
       S. Wells                   approval.

       City of Toronto, Toronto   Annual update and revisions as
       Emergency Management       per the Municipal Code, Chapter
                                                                    September
19     (TEM)                      59, and Toronto Emergency
                                                                    2024
                                  Management Program Committee
       C. O’Sullivan              approval.




                                                                            25
